
--- PAGE 1 ---
mmend 7
A ts you mtyou Icrease Teviewer friendliness by emphasizing key words that iden-
which words to €mphasi reviewers will need to find to review your proposal. We will tell you
derlining) ig the key: ook later in this chapter. Judicious use of subtle emphasis (italics and un-
8ravation to Teviewers STuse causes such emphasis to lose its effect and can even become an ag-

EXPAN
SION OF YOUR BULLETED OUTLINE INTO SENTENCES

Once you are satisfied with
t
your first ith the bulle

ted outline you created, the next step is to expand it into
Of the Overview subs ; Ee .

ection.
Introductory Paragraph

Opening Sentence, Expand the bullet that you wrote for your opening sentence. Make sure that

it reads well and flows easily into the presentation of what is currently known. As described in
the previous chapter, make Sure it contains a “hook,” an indication of the proposal topic, and
some conceptual linkage to the RFA or program you’re targeting. Make sure that the sentence is
arresting and, as such, will immediately attract the reviewer’s interest and attention.

Current Knowledge. Working from the bullets that reflect current knowledge, write 3 to 5 com-
plete sentences that convey what is known about your subject area. This series of sentences
should quickly and concisely convey what the scientific landscape is about the specific puzzle or
problem you are addressing in this proposal. To craft these sentences, consider the following
questions: What do we already know, or what is already suggested about this puzzle? What have
others established? In trying to address or solve the problem, what has already been tried; what
worked, what didn’t, or what did but only partially? Remember that your own data can count as
current knowledge. Cite only the most important references. Here are a few tips for determining
whether the reference would be considered a key reference. First, if the sentence would be fol-
lowed by two or more citations, then consider that it is generally known. Second, if the sentence
would not be believed without citation, include the Citation. Third, if the work is from your own
group, include the citation especially if you are a young investigator.

; owledge Base/Lack of Something. Next, expand the bullet that you wrote to delin-
Gap pape iat aowiedae base or the lack of something that will drive the application.
eate a at works well here is for the first part of the statement to provide a quick summary of
oe ent knowns” you just explained, with the second part of the statement providing the spe-
ie

cific gap or unknown. For example:

“while these findings collectively suggest X, Y remains unknown/unspecified.”
ge «AJthough these studies have provided a general sense of X, there is a knowledge gap re-
¥° a a rf e precise mechanisms by vies Y occurs.”
ar ‘i t lated to Y becau: ins unsub-
: has facilitated X but has not trans lo ause Z remains un:
X. “This knowledge

stantiated.”

Consequences of Not Meeting the Need. These bullets should be expanded
Statement of: ‘Need The first will frame the need, which will of course be related to the gap in
a

into two sentences- ;

--- PAGE 2 ---
knowledge (or lack of something). For the first sentence, state clearly that there is an urgent or

ie need. "There is, therefore, a critical need to..." Note that “critical need” is underlined
and italicized. If publications of other investigators are used to support existence of the need, cite

that work. Next expand the bullet on why the continued existence of that need is a problem rele-
vant to the USDA.

Be Sure that your potential consequences statement is congruent with the USDA’s own descrip-
tion of their Priorities. You can use key concepts or words from the RFA description and/or the
Program priority description to craft this sentence. For example, imagine you are an investigator
focused on improvements to the ventilation in swine housing for gestating sows. You might be
submitting a proposal in response to the AFRI Foundational RFA for FY 2021 and FY2022. Spe-
Cifically, your work falls under Program Area Priority Code A1251: “Welfare and Well-being of
Agricultural Animals.” In the RFA, part of the description for this Program Priority reads:

“Evaluation of current animal agriculture production practices and/or development of new or
enhanced management approaches that safeguard both animal welfare and sustainable
production efficiency, including, but not limited to:

¢ Alternatives or improvements for painful management procedures; euthanasia and
slaughter methods to decrease pain and distress; handling and transportation to decrease
injury and distress (including heat stress)”

Using the concept of heat stress from the priority description, you could craft a potential conse-
quences statement along these lines:

“Without this knowledge, the development of ventilation standards for gestating sows in group
pens will remain impossible, risking harmful heat stress for sows, and suboptimal swine perfor-
mance for producers.”

What, Why, Who Paragraph

Long-Term Goal. Expand the bullet for your long-term research goal. It should clearly encom-
pass the gap or unmet need that was delineated in the first paragraph. Do so by completing the
following: “Our [My] long-term goal is to ....” Note that the words “long-term goal have been
underlined and italicized to make them easier for reviewers to find. Note, also, that there is a hy-
phen between “long” and “term.” It is required because those two words created a compound ad-

jective that modifies “goal.”

This is another place that you can potentially incorporate key concepts or words from the RFA or

rogram description. For example, the following long-term goal statement echoes key concepts
fon the Program Priority description for A1201: Animal Breeding and Functional Annotation of
Genomes in the FY 2021-2022 AFRI Foundational RFA:

“Qur long-term goal is to directly inform the development of national breeding strategies to re-
duce abiotic stresses related to X in the context of Y.”

67

--- PAGE 3 ---
In this case, the s j
duce abiotic stp 4 goal with A1201 is “devel

€sses,” and x and

Overall Objective, Now, €xpand the
tence that Conveys what You want to

opment of national breeding strategies to re-
encapsulate your niche area,

ae You wrote for the overall objective into a anal sen-
write here ]j ._ © Produce with this research roject. Make sure that what you
first ee hepa ae 8ap in the knowledge base or Shiny nce that you presented in the
need. Label this sentedicg ie any grant application must be to either fill that gap or meet that
Plication is to.» < °Y Deginning it with something like, “The overall objective of this ap-
“2, Cxample: “The overall ob lective of this application is to determine which struc-
allow it to function in the bovine IFN-y receptor complex.”

7 overall objective, Temember to avoid indeterminate verbs such as “to study,” or
> OF “to examine.” Instead, try answering the question of “why.” Why are you ex-
'Y are you comparing A and B? Usually, the answer is that you are trying to deter-

mine, identify, establish, or confirm Something. Try using those words in your objective instead.
For example:

¢ “Our overall objective is to identify barriers to utilization of insect protection netting
among producers of crop X.”
“Our overall objective is to establish the cost effectiveness of strategy X for doing Y.”
° “Our overall objective is to determine the Processing conditions that will optimize A.”

When you have completed this sentence, make certain that it links back to the gap/lack and state-
ment of need components and that it relates clearly to your long-term goal.

Central Hypothesis and How Formulated. This component will be included if you are writing
either a hypothesis-driven application or a “hybrid” — one that has both hypothesis-containing
and need-driven aims. The expanded bullet should Convey your overarching prediction regarding
how the overall objective will be attained. Ideally, it should have readily identifiable Parts that
will be used to set up the specific objectives/aims. Be certain that what you have Proposed is test-
able, and does not contain conditional words like might, may, likely, or can. Additionally, make
sure that you label this component so that it can be found easily by reviewers.

For example, “The central hypothesis for the proposed research is that function of the B chain in
the bovine receptor complex is dependent on association of its omega helix with a complemen-
tary structure on the a chain, resulting in the creation of a functional receptor.”

le might be, “Our central hypothesis is that a user-friendly, smartphone-based in-
poole Se icaeninit system will decrease overall water usage and fertilizer runoff, while
tegra'

improving crop yields and costs.”

b

68

--- PAGE 4 ---
TIP: The first 3 components in this paragraph create a fo-
cusing progression, which the reviewer must perceive. To
help ensure that they make that connection, the long-term
goal, overall objective, and central hypothesis should be pre-
sented without interposed explanatory information. These
three components should be juxtaposed, so that there is a
seamless flow of logic from the broadest (the long-term
goal) to the narrowest focus (the central hypothesis).

Follow the statement of your central hypothesis with another sentence that expands the bullet
that you wrote to describe how your hypothesis was formulated, i.e., why it represents the most
attractive avenue of research to pursue first. Remember that this is the second place that you can
incorporate your earlier findings into the overall argument or story. For example, “We have for-
mulated this hypothesis based on strong preliminary findings, which suggest that .” If the

work of others is used in addition to your own preliminary data to support formulation of your
central hypothesis, the relevant publications should be cited. Other examples:

e “This hypothesis is grounded in our preliminary data indicating Q.”

¢ “This hypothesis is based on our prior data suggesting X, which echoes and extends that
of Archer and Katzenberg (2019).”

Now write your own central hypothesis, then expand the bullet(s) that you wrote to describe how
your hypothesis was formulated, i.e., why it has been chosen as your “best bet.”

Well-Prepared and Research Environment. Next, using the bullets that you wrote earlier, write
1 to 2 complete sentences that summarize why you and your colleagues have the competitive
edge in this area of research. Remember that if no one feature makes your program stand out,
you will want to emphasize the constellation of your research team’s strengths. This statement
also helps meet the statement in most USDA application instructions to describe, where applica-
ble, in the Introduction, “reasons for performing the work at the proposed institution.”

Regardless of what you write here, you must be very careful how you construct this component.
The last thing that you want to do is inadvertently convey that you are overly impressed with
your own credentials/accomplishments. An acceptable set of sentences might be something like,
“We are particularly well prepared to undertake the proposed research because our team consists
of a protein chemist, a membrane biophysicist, and a molecular biologist, each with long-stand-
ing research interests in signaling by bovine IFN-y, Additionally, we have unique access to a re-
search herd of susceptible cattle and equipment X, making our environment especially conducive

to successful completion of the proposed research.” Now, write your comparable sentence(s) in
your draft document.

Specific Objectives “Paragraph”

Begin paragraph three with a sentence something like, “We Propose [two/three] specific objec-
tives:” For integrated projects, you can also harness this sentence to remind the reader that the

69

--- PAGE 5 ---
integra €d; for e «
[two/ three] inj “ample, “We plan ‘0 achieve our overall objective with the following

. ated r 2
alms and the Workin scarch and extension aims.” Next, expand the bullets for your specific

'8 hypothes} :
back toa Part of your cena nach After doing so, make Certain that each clearly links

inate Paragraphs should be bolded or otherwise highlighted, except for
ibed for the hypothesis-containing Specific objectives,
For the extension- or educat;
Ey ation-related specific object; i
plan to do. As hentoneihce pecitic objectives, have a bolded headline of what you

0. Ore, these aims can be more task-oriented but try to focus on what
you plan to accomplish by the activiti ; : af

© production.” This type of specific objective
you plan to do it (e.g., conduct seminars for
producer boards, Or create the displays featuring A and B). This indication of the methods or ap-

Payoff Paragraph

Innovation/Creativity/Originality, Ifyou have written a bullet that describes why your re-
search/approach is innovative, expand it into a sentence that will open Paragraph four. If you
have a credible claim to innovation, be direct about it. Remember to create as much contrast as
possible between the “status quo” and what You are proposing to do. For example, “The pro-
posed project is innovative because in doing/considering/addressing X, it departs from the status
quo, which typically only involves Y.”

RFA instructions (¢.g., AFRI Foundational, and Sustainable Agricultural
See) ae ee of novelty/originality be placed in Rationale & Significance!
ystems),

A expanding the bullets that present your expected outcomes and
Expected Outcomes. a ttoe Ns hed an “innovation” sentence to open this paragraph, you
why they are important. Zs expectations by using a segue, such as: “This approach is expected
might begin presenting ed omes: identification of X, confirmation of Y...” Alternatively, if you
to yield the following oul a about innovation, begin the fourth Paragraph with a sentence some-
didn’t open iors deaoiate n of these studies, our expectation is to have identified X, confirmed
thing like: “At the

eee .
aragraph and your Overview by expanding the bullets that
Positive Impact. Cop oe eee that your research will have. It rath similar to
uu wrote to summari Jlectively establishing how structure of the B protein dictates its role in
oe thing like, “By © by the bovine IFN-y receptor complex, these outcomes are intended to
etpsmembrane a ieee qrsiselce and thus have a positive impact on bovine health and well-
trans yharmaco!

70

--- PAGE 6 ---
being.”

Wh en crafting the positive impact statement, choose your words carefully. Avoid saying that you
hope” or “believe” that your results will have a positive impact, or that your findings “should”
have 4 positive effect. At the same time, avoid too many instances of “will,” which can be per-
relved as being overly confident or over-promising, Instead, choose words that convey reasona-
ble confidence, e. g., “We anticipate/intend/project/expect that these results will have a positive

unpact...”

FINALIZING YOUR OVERVIEW SUBSECTION

First Draft of the Overview Part of Your Introduction Section. Revise and refine the sen-
tences until they flow well. Add material, if needed, to link the sentences appropriately and blend
them into readable prose. If the compelling flow of logic that you need isn’t there, you may have
to rewrite the components that don’t work. It may even be necessary to go back to the bulleted
Outline stage. Whatever it takes, invest the effort until this first, Overview subsection of your In-
troduction works and accomplishes its purpose. When you are done, you should have approxi-
mately 1.0 to 1.5 pages. If you have more than that, prune what you have written until you meet
that mark. Switching to a smaller font and narrowing the margins are not options, because of
USDA tules for formatting. Taking out open lines between paragraphs to stay within 1.5 pages
should not be an option, because sacrificing readability will not serve you well.

Concluding Work on the Overview Part of Your Introduction Section. At this point, you
should have an Overview that succinctly conveys to your reviewers, in a compelling and exciting
way, what’s known, what’s not known, what you are going to do about it, what your expectations
are, and why the expected results will be agriculturally important. If you have time, show your
draft to one or more of your colleagues to determine whether it is as clear and compelling a
presentation as you think it is. If it still needs work, continue to revise this subsection until you
are satisfied. Before continuing with the remainder of the proposal, be sure to have your col-
leagues read this subsection. As discussed in Chapter 20 on the Pre-Submission Review Commit-
tee, internal peer-review of this Overview is a critical step in creating a competitive application.

LEARNING MILESTONES FOR CHAPTER 7:

1. Understand the iterative nature of expanding the bullets for your Overview subsection
into complete sentences, and appreciate how their expansion creates a compelling, logical
argument for the Overview.

2. Recognize the value of labeling these components with underlining and italics as a re-
viewer-friendly strategy that helps reviewers know precisely why the related information
has been included.

3. Appreciate how making your specific aims stand out with tabs and bolding serves as a
visual cue and provides easy recognition by reviewers.

4. Appreciate the importance of citing only key references in this subsection.

71


--- PAGE 7 ---
Example of
1) a Hypothesis-driven Overview Subsection

This Overvie
i : iid
Principal layed an from a USDA/AFRI-funded project is reprinted with the permission of
gator Dr. Caleb Lemley of Mississippi State University.

MELATO
Aes DEDIATED REGULATION OF BOVINE PLACENTAL CIRCADIAN
G COMPROMISED PREGNANCIES

AFRI Competitive Grant, PROJ NO: MIS-339090

INTRODUCTION
Overview

Proper fetal nutrition Via adequate uteroplacental blood flow is critical to maximize bovine off-
Spring Production potential while minimizing pregnancy wastage and calf morbidity and mortal-
ity, which are estimated to cost producers over $1 billion annually (USDA-NASS, 2011). Inade-
quate maternal nutrition leading to a compromised pregnancy increases calf mortality rate by

10% at or near birth, while an additional 20% of calves die prior to weaning (Corah et al., 1975).
Common Signs of a compromised pregnancy are decreased uteroplacental blood flow and placen-
tal nutrient transport, which are both indicators of placental functional capacity (Fowden et al.,
2006). Recently our team observed circadian rhythms in bovine uterine blood flow and placental
clock gene expression, which were increased from the early morning to afternoon following die-
tary melatonin supplementation. While our initial findings are intriguing, the therapeutic poten-
tial of ameliorating inadequate daytime uterine blood flow with dietary melatonin during a com-
promised pregnancy remains unknown. Thus, there is a critical need to identify the physiological
pathways through which melatonin mediates placental rhythms in the context of a compromised
pregnancy. In the absence of such information, the substantial economic losses of offspring born
from a suboptimal uteroplacental environment will persist.

Our long-term goal is to increase the efficiency of livestock animal production by identifying
novel pathways that can be used to improve placental functional capacity during a compromised
pregnancy. The overall objective for this application is to identify melatonin-induced circadian
rhythms in placental functional capacity and gene expression in the context of a compromised
pregnancy. The central hypothesis for the proposed tesearch is that exogenous melatonin during
the daytime will ameliorate inadequate placental functional capacity by increasing the daytime
amplitude of placental clock genes during maternal nutrient restriction. This hypothesis was for-
mulated based on strong preliminary findings, which indicate that dietary melatonin supplemen-
tation in the morning increased daytime uteroplacental blood flow and placental clock gene ex-
ssion, while maternal nutrient restriction decreased daytime uterine blood flow compared to
pre: b a d in adequately fed dams. Our diverse team of investigators is especially well-pre-
that ¢ 3 conduct the proposed work as it consists of research scientists and veterinarians with a
ares ie ding collaborative history and expertise in reproductive biology, large animal theri-
long-stan and ruminant nutrition. Additionally, our research environment is especially condu-
ogenology, ccessful completion of the work as we have access to the necessary animal han-

ae Ee and large animal surgical suites. We will test the central hypothesis by pursuing
ing

the following specific objectives:

72

--- PAGE 8 ---
Specific Objective #1: Identify differences in circadian rhythms in bovine uterine and umb
cal blood flow in adequately fed and nutrient-restricted dams supplemented with or withou
dietary melatonin. Our working hypothesis, based on our aforementioned preliminary data
demonstrating opposite responses in daytime uterine blood flow during maternal nutrient re-
striction versus melatonin supplementation, is that melatonin supplementation during the day-
time will mitigate the maternal nutrient restriction-induced decreases in daytime uterine and um-
bilical blood flow.

Specific Objective #2: Identify differences in circadian rhythms in placental clock gene ex-
Pression in adequately fed and nutrient-restricted dams supplemented with or without dietary
melatonin, Our working hypothesis is that the daytime amplitude of placental clock gene expres-
sion and clock-controlled angiogenic factor expression (e.g., VEGF, COX2) in melatonin supple-
mented dams will be greater than that observed in dams with compromised pregnancies brought
about by nutrient restriction. This hypothesis was formulated from our aforementioned prelimi-
nary data demonstrating an increase in bovine placental clock gene expression following daytime
melatonin supplementation.

At the conclusion of this research, our expectation is to have identified melatonin as a regulator
of circadian rhythms in uteroplacental blood flow and placental clock genes. Moreover, we will
determine the feasibility of an in vitro model for examining 24-hour rhythms in placental func-
tional capacity, which is more practical for generating larger data sets related to placental circa-
dian research. These outcomes are expected to have significant positive impacts on maximizing
ruminant placental efficiency and directly informing the development of superior strategies to
mitigate wastage of placental functional capacity.

73
