
--- PAGE 1 ---
CHAPTER 6
Soe ts Oia arterieg Vou run they si an rede yoot Sie dea? tu pues BB

THE OVERVIEW SUBSECTION: CONCEPTUAL
OVERVIEW & CREATING A BULLETED OUTLINE

a! ote alt io moti) el ania et scour olive nines st in th wallet.

CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW

TIP: Strategically, the Overview subsection of the Introduc-
tion should be written to create a “partnership” with the as-
signed reviewers who will represent you at the review-panel
meeting. You will provide the conceptual framework on
which they will orally hang the details of what will be done.

The Overview subsection is critical to writing a competitive USDA grant application. It is the
most important component related to the development of your proposal, because as noted earlier,
it becomes the template or master plan for the rest of your proposal. If this subsection works
well, everything else will be much easier to write.

The first subsection of the Introduction section must be an “overview” that sets the scene for
your reviewers, captures their collective interest, and conveys several very important pieces of
information. This first subsection is your first and most important chance to intrigue your re-
viewers with the prospects of your application. It is your first opportunity to convince them that
you and your colleagues have a competitive edge in terms of doing the proposed work. You gen-
erally have one chance in which to accomplish these things, and this is it!

There are two audiences for this subsection. The first is the three or four reviewers who will read
your application in detail. The second is the other 16 to 20 members of the review panel. These
reviewers in all probability will not have read your proposal before it comes up for evaluation at
the review panel meeting. Regardless, these reviewers have an equal vote in establishing your
proposal’s final ranking. You need to appreciate that they will want to make an informed vote,
not a directed one. Therefore, at the meeting, while your assigned reviewers are presenting your
proposal to other members of the panel most of the others will be playing catch up by teading
parts of your proposal to determine whether or not they agree with what they are hearing. In
other words — and this is what you must understand — they will be doing two things at the same
time: listening to your spokespersons — the primary, secondary, and tertiary reviewers — while, at
the same time, they are likely reading parts of your proposal. They may focus on the title, the
Project Summary/Abstract, the Overview subsection of the Introduction section and/or the Ra-
tionale and Significance section, If you have ever tried to read and comprehend something that is
filled with detail while someone is talking to you, you know that it is impossible; either

50

--- PAGE 2 ---
So

comprehension of what you are Teadi " +
oy ing or of wi ii . This fact is what in-
forms our approach to writing the versed minesa a ae a

' at sacl ane the details of what is proposed. Thus, in this subsection you are
ver isned reviewers at the review-panel meeting. The flow of logic has to
Pelling than it is elsewhere in the proposal — so compelling that reviewers can
ing while Someone js talking to them at the same time. Together with the Ra-
ince section, it is one of the most important parts of the application in terms

Tre: To create a compelling flow of logic in this sub-
Section, you must have in-depth understanding of each
component and what it is meant to convey.

starting with the creation of a bulleted outline.

CREATE A BULLETED OUTLINE

TIP: Outlining is your key to developing linkage and
to avoiding unnecessary detail!

One of the most important tips that we can give you regarding development of this subsection is
to begin by creating a bulleted outline. When extra verbiage is removed and you are dealing only
with brief bullets, you can see better how the various components relate to each other and can
recognize and eliminate extraneous detail. Without the interfering clutter of unnecessary words,
the outline approach also allows you to see whether or not the logic and the Concepts flow, as

they must in a competitive application.

The explanations that follow will give you a strong working knowledge of the purpose of each
component, as well as how it must be linked to other components. When you create your bullets,
we recommend that you do so in four, distinct paragraphs. The first three are meant to gradually
ratchet up detail as the reviewer reads deeper into the subsection, while the last is included to tell
reviewers what they will get for their investment if they decide to Invest in your proposal.

in this chapter we will ask you to make a series of re-
sponses in a set order. A template is available on our website (www.grantcentral.com/down Y
loads-usda/) in which you can make your responses. Those Tesponses will become the bullets in
your outline. Alternatively, you can use the headings below in your own document, to

To help you create your bulleted outline,

51


--- PAGE 3 ---
Gua the bullets. Once you are satisfied with the bullets and how they link to each other,
Fe apter 7 will help you to expand them into sentences that will collectively become the first
aft of your Overview subsection. You can then edit and refine your first draft to produce the

vein that will become the template or master plan for writing the rest of your Project Narra-
ve.

In the explanations that follow, we will introduce you to the purpose of each component, as well
as how it must be linked to other components. We recommend that you arrange your bullets in
four, distinct paragraphs.

Introductory Paragraph

TIP: The purpose of this paragraph is to frame the subject of your
proposal as an important, USDA-relevant problem that urgently
needs to be addressed.

Opening Sentence. The purpose of this sentence is to immediately capture reviewers’ interest
and to highlight the USDA-, NIFA- or program-relevant area that your application will address.
It should focus on something that most of the reviewers will not know, which is what will make
it interesting. For example, were you writing an application about a biochemical defect you sus-
pect is the cause of susceptibility of a high-yield crop plant to a specific pathogen, what you
write here should not focus on fundamental biochemistry. Neither should you begin with a sen-
tence like, “Plant pathogens have a serious impact on the overall yield of commercial crops.”
This type of sentence tells the reviewer nothing useful, and nothing they do not already know. It
is also so general that it could be the opening sentence for almost any proposal on almost any as-
pect of plant pathogens. Instead, you should create a sentence that simultaneously (1) creates an
interesting hook, e.g., presents some sort of contrast, conundrum, paradox, or interesting quanti-
fication, while also (2)-presenting the specific problem or puzzle your proposal is addressing
(within the overarching conceptual umbrella of plant pathogens), and (3) incorporating words or
concepts that relate to the program or RFA you are targeting.

At this point, in the aforementioned downloadable template, write a bullet that conveys the agri-
cultural importance of your area of interest.

Current Knowledge. The purpose for this component is to ensure that everyone on the review
panel is current with respect to what is known about the puzzle or problem your project is in-
tended to solve. It is highly likely that the majority of your proposal’s reviewers will not be an
expert on the specific subject that you are offering. They will be in the same “ballpark,” but they
won’t be experts, as assigned reviewers are likely to be (if not experts, they will be close). Ac-
cordingly, 4 to 5 carefully written sentences are needed that provide the reader with a snapshot of
the scientific landscape around the particular problem, puzzle you are addressing. Remember that
your own prior studies or preliminary data can count as part of “Current Knowledge.” This
shows that your work is already in dialogue with the state of the science around this puzzle. How
is it confirming, challenging, refuting, or extending the other knowns?

52

--- PAGE 4 ---
Additionally, if you are Preparin , . « ;
°? ring an Extension or Education proposal, remember that “Current
pete can and should include some indication of stakeholder perceptions of the problem,
nati Sivas lee nary survey results from a producer forum. Including this kind of infor-

i z ae sy -e fs suuisty the proposal instructions for most USDA programs that say “[The Intro-
eee bat fa nee in-depth information on the following, when applicable: (1) Estimates oF

i catch ean td the re ing state-federal food an
agricultural 1 esearch, educa Televance to stakeholders and ongoing state-feder

: é : ; tion, and extension programs; (2) The role of stakeholders in problem
identification, Planning, implementation, and evaluation, as appropriate...”

Altogether, Presenting the “Current Knowledge” will facilitate reviewers’ ability to understand
why what you will propose is needed. Only key citations should be provided using the reviewer-
friendly “author/year” approach described in Chapter 10, i.c., not numerals, The Current

Knowledge component has the additional purpose of setting up presentation of the gap in the
knowledge base or critical need that your application will address.

Write bullets that flow logically, one into the next, in such a way that they will lead the reviewer
to the “jumping-off point” f

or your application, i.e., what needs to be done next.

Gap in the Knowledge Base/Lack of Something. This component is one of the most important in
creating the Overview subsection, because all of the logic downstream flows from it. It is the first
sentence in framing the problem; it should be simple and direct. It should identify a specific gap
in the knowledge base or lack of something that drives your proposed project, and thus your
grant application. Furthermore, it must link back to the “current knowledge” component as the

next logical step that is required to advance the field or solve the problem that you have identi-
fied.

For USDA proposals, the RFA to which you are responding should play an important part in

framing the problem. The work may be based on a gap in the knowledge or a lack of something
that sets up a need.

> Gap in the Knowledge Base to be Addressed: Now that your reviewers have an apprecia-
tion for what is known, you need to introduce them to what is missing and, therefore,
holding back the field. The gap in the knowledge base that you highlight should be the
one that you will address with this research proposal.

> Lack of Something: Alternatively, the subject of your proposal may be a lack of some-
thing. For an extension or education proposal, this would be the lack of extension or edu-

cation activities related to the priority area in the RFA to which you are Tesponding, as
would be the case in an equipment- or training-grant application, Such proposals would
not have a central hypothesis.

In the template, write a bullet that clearly defines the gap that you want to fill, or the lack that
you are addressing.

Statement of Need and the Consequences of Not Meeting the Need, Once you have defined
what is missing, the next step is to frame it as a problem that demands

aS Pro 4 solution. You do that by
first writing a statement of need. What, explicitly, is needed? Most of the time it will be a
53


--- PAGE 5 ---
“higher level,” more conceptual version of the gap statement, that reflects the next step we need
to take to address the gap or lack that you have just described.

Using the template, write a bullet (or two) that summarizes the statement of need that will drive
your application.

Next, you must support your assertion of need by objectively describing what the consequence(s)
of failing to meet the need would be. What agency- or program-relevant problem is going to be
created, exacerbated, or allowed to persist if the need remains unmet or unaddressed? The most
important consequence should be the blockage or delay of an important aspect of the program’s
agenda, strategic objectives/priorities, or other area of relevance to the funder. By issuing the
RFA in a specific subject area, and specifying their program priorities, the USDA has identified
that area as being important! For your potential consequences statement, consider folding in key
words or concepts from the program area priority description or RFA you are targeting. Now, in
the template, write one or more bullets that outline(s) the consequences of not meeting the need
in your particular case.

TIP: At the conclusion of the first paragraph, which should be no
more than 1/3 of the first page, the reviewers should understand that
the research area is relevant to agriculture, they should be up to
speed with respect to current knowledge in the field, and they
should be completely convinced that there is an important problem!

“What, Why, Who” Paragraph

The first three components in this paragraph must create a focusing progression that leads the re-
viewer from the broadest to the narrowest focus that is relevant to your project.

Long-Term Goal. The purpose for this component is to project the continuum of research that
you will pursue over the course of multiple periods of grant support. In other words, this compo-
nent should tell reviewers what the “big picture” of your research program is. It must be relevant
to agriculture, i.e., to the USDA’s mission, and must be broad enough to encompass the need that
you offered in the first paragraph. When you respond to a specific RFA or Program Priority
Area, the purpose of the RFA or Program Priority Area should be reflected in your long-term
goal; by definition, your long-term goal and that of the USDA should be in concert. It should re-
flect both the specific area of the RFA/Program Priority Area and the niche area that you intend
to systematically develop as your own. It must also be realistic, ie., something that is clearly
achievable over a finite period of time. For example, if you were an expert on organic manage-
ment of soil quality, it would not be credible to write that your long-term goal “is to convert all
US agriculture to organic production.”

Now, consider the larger, overarching priorities of your target program or RFA, and in the tem-
plate, write a single bullet that conveys what your long-term goal is,

54

--- PAGE 6 ---
oO jecti, .

Fi ee Spee aie ce defines the Purpose for your grant application, i.e., what you
ough this proj, 2 .

Paragraph. Given that fact tS Project. It must be to meet the need that you set forth in the first

this component must link back to, and be an outgrowth of that state-
ment of need, It mTaust also link to : Da
te

uum of research that you project
Sere) the roduct that you aspire to Provide, not the process that will produce it. For example,
© study,” “to investigate,” or “to compare” something would not be an appropriate objective;
what you want is the Product that the act of studying, investigating, or examining will produce.
In addition, “to study,” “to investigate,” and “to compare” are temporally indeterminate; how
ied, investigated, or compare enough to achieve the objec-

Within the template, write a single bullet that projects your overall objective for this application.
Check to make sure that itis a conceptual paraphrase of your critical need statement, and that it

fits under the Conceptual umbrella of your long-term goal.

Central Hypothesis and How Formulated. Remember that in the Scientific Merit criterion, one
of the individual criteria listed is “Conceptual adequacy of the research, and suitability of the hy-
pothesis, as applicable.” These last two words are important. USDA research Programs may be
need driven or hypothesis driven. Behavioral and social Sciences research, as well as the devel-

You must link the central hypothesis back to the overall objective because the central hypothesis
is what must be tested in order to attain the overall objective. The Purpose for the hypothesis is to
provide focus for your research project and, therefore, your grant application. Your hypothesis
should be directional; that is, it should be your prediction about the Positive or negative change,
relationship, or difference you expect to see. It typically contains words like Increase/decrease,
greater/less, higher/lower, positive/negative. Implicit in the fact that you are calling ita hypothe-
sis is the fact that, when tested, it could prove to be invalid. If there is no chance for invalidity,
then what you have written is not a hypothesis. In other words, what you write here should not
inadvertently project a predetermined conclusion. It should not be that you have already decided

hat the outcome is and now, you are out to “prove’ that you re correct. Additionally, hypothe-
ii cannot contain conditional words like can, may, might, or likely. Conditional words render
these “hypotheses” fundamentally unfalsifiable.

is should be broadly stated and should conceptually encompass all of the
Your See objectives, In other words, your central hypothesis should be crafted to
esearch oF identifiable “parts.” Each of those parts will set up a specific objective to test the re-
have ar va integrated proposals, the hypothesis should only cover the research aims, and not
d z fe f
fey to dncorporats extension aims.

. : hat conveys what your central hypothesis is.
wa te a single bullet t yp
within the template, wri
Now, ies


--- PAGE 7 ---
How formulated Your own preliminary/prior data are the most important basis for formulating

The published work of others, or theory, which also support the formulation of your central hy-

pothesis and are complementary to your own preliminary data, should be the subject of addi-
tional bullets.

Now, write bullets that support how your central hypothesis was formulated — how you focused
on this starting point from among all others. The first bullet should pertain to your own prelimi-
nary data, followed by bullets that reflect the supporting work of others, if applicable.

Well-Prepared and Research Environment. The second major review criterion used to evaluate
USDA grant applications begins “Qualifications of the Research Personnel, Adequacy of Facili-
ties...” You need to address both points here. Why are you and your colleagues better prepared
to address the problem than other, equally qualified investigators are? Occasionally, it will be be-
Cause you have unique expertise, equipment or technology, stakeholder/community partnerships,
Or access to unique samples or populations that no one else has. If you are fortunate enough to be
able to make such a claim, by all means, do so. However, most of the time you will have the
competitive edge because of a composite of characteristics, no one of which is particularly
unique by itself. Collectively, they set you and your group apart. Usually, the quantity and qual-
ity of your preliminary data make the best case for why you are best prepared to undertake the
proposed research; because of such data, you have a Tunning start. Therefore, begin with a bullet
that tells the reviewer specifically what makes your preliminary data strong and/or novel. Con-
tinue with additional, complementary bullets, e.g., such things as the combined expertise of your
research team (e.g., basic researchers and producers or clinicians working together to provide the
entire spectrum of expertise necessary to obtain a definitive outcome), or extensive experience
with a demanding model. Conclude with a bullet or two about your research environment and
why it is particularly supportive of the kinds of research that will be performed. This may be be-
cause of essential core facilities, proven extension support, or provision of skilled technical sup-
port by the institution. Be specific with all of your bullets here! Avoid the temptation of indulg-
ing in clichés (e.g., state-of-the-art equipment) and empty generalities (e.g., Dr. X is an outstand-
ing molecular biologist).

Consider these examples to jog your thinking, and then, in the template, write the bullets that de-
scribe why you and your team are particularly well prepared to carry out this work.

“Our interdisciplinary team is uniquely prepared to undertake the proposed work because
of our expertise in field A and our collective skills with technique B. Additionally, we
have access to special equipment C at the University of X’s Center for Q.”

e “Our team is ideally suited to complete the proposed research given our access to data-
base Q through our industry partner X, and our 10-year collaborative history identifying

YY.”

--- PAGE 8 ---
“Our Sroup is well-positi
“Positioned to -
cess to X and our Svea, Pastcnare the proposed project because of unfettered ac

engagement.” (Or... o artnership that will facilitate producer recruitment and

" ur facility houses A, B, and C, which ensures » OF
++-Our Partnership with entity X ensures/facilitates Y.”) Li gene

Specific Objectives “Paragraph”

As the name implies, this component Conveys specifics about the research. The approach to cre-
ating the Specific objectives differs for hypothesis- and need-driven proposals. Please note that
We will sometimes use the words “objective” and “aim” interchangeably. Whether you choose to
call them the Specific Aims or Specific Objectives, the only concern is that you be consistent
within the document, and also consistent with the expectations within your sub-field. It is critical

to get these right. “Clarity and delineation of objectives” is one of the review criteria under Sci-
entific Merit.

Although commonly considered synonymous, for USDA/NIFA applications, we recommend us-
ing the term “specific objectives” instead of “specific aims.” This is because the term “specific

objectives” is what is most commonly used in USDA/NIFA guides and documents, “Specific
aims” is more common at other federal funding agencies, e.g., the NIH.

Hypothesis-Containing Applications. The specific objectives are often the most difficult compo-
nents of the subsection to write. They must clearly grow out of your central hypothesis because
their purpose is to test its parts. Thus, with tespect to linkage, there must be complete concord-
ance between the specific objectives and the parts of your central hypothesis. The aims need to
be brief, informative, attention-getting “headlines” that will attract a reviewer’s attention and
whet their interest. Each aim should convey why that part of the research is being Proposed, not
what will be done. In a hypothesis-containing application, avoid descriptive specific objectives,
iLe., objectives that project what is best referred to as “look-to-see” research. In these cases, the
message is, “I will do something, look to see what happens, and then describe whatever the out-
come is.” This is, however, the antithesis of hypothesis-driven tesearch.). For this reason, you
should avoid using words in your specific objectives that depict an activity; these include but are
not limited to study, examine, explore, describe, catalog, or investigate. These activity- and pro-
cess-oriented words describe how you will achieve the specific objective, but they are typically
not the specific objective itself. As with the overall objective, if you are tempted to use these
words, ask yourself the “why” question: “Why are you going to compare the effect of A and B on
C?” The answer might be something like, “Well, it’s going to allow me to determine X.” In that
case “to determine X” is probably your specific objective, and “comparing” is how you will

achieve it.

ific objectives should deliberately be written to be global and open-ended, but then be
gett, a es or primary hypothesis. This will help ensure that each specific objective
ie tually covers any alternative to which you might have to turn in the unlikely event that its
concep /primary hypothesis tests invalid. The following example is given entirely as an illustra-
haveetitd kind of approach we recommend:
tion

57


--- PAGE 9 ---
° “Specific Objective 1: Identify the key host components regulating initiation of nod-
ulation in Pueraria Phaseoloides.”
This is a favorable example of a specific objective that is written at a broad, open-ended
level. If the Purpose is to “identify the key components,” then the working hypothesis
must be the “best bet” as to what the components are. It might read something like:

° “Our working hypothesis is that binding rhizobial nod factors to surface receptors of root
hair cells induces a rapid spike of calcium entry, which is necessary, but not sufficient,
for initiation of root hair curling. This hypothesis is based on our preliminary co-culture
Tesults indicating that X.”

By using the working hypothesis to narrow the range of possibilities to specific entities, the ap-
Plicant avoids criticism that the Specific objective is unfocused. Later in the application, under
Potential Problems and Alternative Strategies (Later in the application, under Potential Problems
and Alternative Strategies in the Approach), the fallback Position — a viable alternative to which
the applicant Would turn in the event of hypothesis invalidity — will be offered. That assures the
reviewers that, regardless of how the primary hypothesis tests, the applicant will still land on
their feet and attain the Specific objective, The trap of writing a specific objective like, “Deter-
mine whether calcium initiates root hair curling” is avoided. With that kind of specific objective,
if it is a calcium spike, there’s no problem. However, if it’s not, the applicant (and the reviewer)
is left with nothing other than a negative outcome, which is rarely enough to satisfy your review-
ers.

Also note that immediately after the working hypothesis, you have another opportunity to feature
some preliminary data or earlier findings from your team that support the proposed work. As
briefly as possible, tell the reader what those results or findings were. This can be done as a sepa-
rate sentence after the working hypothesis, or, potentially, within the hypothesis statement itself,
e.g., “Our working hypothesis, based on our prior finding that X, is that a will increase B in con-
text C.”

The example below will illustrate further how to avoid the trap of writing descriptive specific ob-
jectives. It should clarify why well written specific objectives in hypothesis-driven Proposals are
most often an answer to the question, “Why am I proposing this part of the research,”

CONVERSION OF DESCRIPTIVE SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES (“WHAT” WILL BE
DONE) TO ONES THAT ARE CONCEPTUAL (“WHY” THE WORK IS PROPOSED)

I. Determine the genotypic allele frequencies of the AAA and BBB Senes in a closed, unse-
lected, drug-naive population.

2. Determine the genotypic allele frequencies of the AAA and BBB genes in q Population that
has been highly selected by frequent long-term drug treatment,

. Select for alleles that convey resistance by comparing gene expression in the naive ‘popula-
tion with the frequently treated population,

358

--- PAGE 10 ---
eee

Note that each of th i
‘ e abov i re eee
ifferent populations we a as inves description of what” will be done. The first two set up

by compar “ treated. The third seeks to determine what the difference is
Pating the two Populations. Were we to ask the investigator why they want to make the

comparison, they would Tespond wii ian cern :
cause resistance” Thus, all ie ea ithout hesitation, “To identify the alleles that most likely

: 4 of the specific Objectives above could better be combined into a
Single, “why-oriented” Specific objective such as: :

1. Identify candidate alleles Sor avermectin resistance,

working hypothesis, which woul

liminary data, you would provide your best bet, out of all possibilities, as to what the resistance
alleles most likely are. The rest of the Research Plan would be designed to test that hypothesis,

This sample exemplifies why preliminary data are so important: data enable formulation of a fo-
cusing hypothesis for each specific objective. With Tespect to deciding whether or not you have
enough preliminary data, it isn’t necessary that the research proposed be completed, as some
would contend. However, enough has to have been done to allow the applicant to formulate a
credible, testable working hypothesis that provides direction — focus — for the research that is
proposed under the specific objective. For basic scientists, the research design presented later
would offer an alternative to which the applicant would turn in the unlikely event that the work-
ing hypothesis would test invalid. The combination of the broad specific objective, focused bya
working hypothesis, which is then complemented later by an “escape-hatch” alternative (in the
case of bench science), is a powerful way of assuring reviewers that, regardless of how the origi-
nal working hypothesis would test, the goal for the specific objective would still be attained.

oe

i bjectives you present must test all parts of your central hypothesis. Ideally, the re-
es eee ie able to see easily that each specific objective links to a specific part of your
ei hypothesis. If a specific objective isn’t clearly related to testing some aspect of the central
fepedicle it is likely to be rejected by reviewers as superfluous.

ee of your specific objectives to no more than four, at most. Why? Be-
You sheuie au epee . ae in es pages to substantively develop more than that. Each
cause you don’ e should be of approximately equal weight, i.e., equal in importance to the others
specific objectiv similar amount of work. Additionally, however, reviewers sometimes perceive
and projecting BS tives as too many “moving parts,” or being overly ambitious regarding the
four specific hauler They will often question, for example, whether Specific Objective 1 needs
scope of the ea as preliminary work, or whether Specific Objective 4 needs to wait for a
to be oo Ge times, two specific objectives could be collapsed into one,
subsequent S| ?

: bjective must flow logically into the second, and so on; however, none of them
The first specific 0 ps expected outcome of an earlier aim. Why? Because, if a specific objec-
n be dependent on yields a partial or unexpected outcome, the subsequent, dependent spe-
os is unsuccessful, ji id be compromised, impossible to execute, or no longer relevant. For
= ative(S) COU!
cific objective(s) 59

:

--- PAGE 11 ---
example, consider an application on gene regulation that has as its first specific objective, “Clone
the promoter [regulator] for gene X.” Examination of the subsequent specific objectives reveals
that all of them are dependent on availability of the promoter. This application would be funda-
mentally and fatally flawed because if the promoter couldn’t be cloned, the rest of the work
couldn’t be done properly, or done at all. The applicant should have realized that and cloned the
Promoter as part of their preliminary studies. Another example of a similarly flawed specific ob-
Jective might be, “Secure agreements from producers to use our test approach in one-acre plots.”
If the applicant doesn’t already have such agreements in place, the project will be seen as having
tisk even before the reviewers even consider the proposed research!

Using these tips, in the template, write bullets that summarize your specific objectives. Follow
each with another bullet that projects the working hypothesis for each one. Determine if you are
able to write a “how formulated” statement for the working hypothesis that features any addi-
tional preliminary data. Make sure that the number of specific objectives is concordant with the
number of parts that are found in your central hypothesis.

We emphasize again that the importance of your specific objectives cannot be exaggerated. If
they work well together, the rest of the application will be relatively easy to write. Therefore,
before proceeding, we recommend that you review what you have just written one more time
with the following important questions in mind:

i. Are any of them descriptive, i.e., does any propose “look-to-see” research that is
a fishing expedition?

ii. Are the specific objectives credible outgrowths of your application’s central hy-
pothesis? Is each driven by its own working/primary hypothesis, which serves to
focus the research that is proposed under that specific objective?

iii. Is there relative balance between your specific objectives with respect to antici-
pated effort and importance of outcome? For an Integrated Project, is it clear that
your extension and/or education portion make up at least 1/3 of the project?

iv. Does your ability to pursue later specific objectives depend in any critical way
upon an expected outcome of an earlier one?

If your answer is “Yes” to either question i or iv, or “No” to either question ii or iii, you need to
reformulate your specific objectives before proceeding.

Applications that Do Not Contain Hypotheses. Researchers who use qualitative methodologies
(e.g., focus groups, interviews, or observational strategies) typically do not use hypotheses or hy-
pothesis-testing frameworks. Additionally, some disciplines or subdisciplines in engineering,
modeling, or genomics may use more task-oriented orientations to their work and may or may
not use hypotheses either. For example, the overall objective may be to optimize a process, or to
build a better widget. Often, the specific objectives then involve a series of sequential steps or

tasks.

60

--- PAGE 12 ---
For example, writing

“Specific Objective 2: Perform sensitivity analyses” or “Specific Objective
2: Conduct stakehold

ler interviews” doesn’t convey what the goal of the specific objective is,

Instead, wording like

° “Specific Objective 2: Validate the X of Y”
° “Specific Objective 2: Identify stakeholder perceptions of Q”

would convey the larger purpose of why you are performing a given task.

1. Omit the central hypothesis; let all specific objectives conceptually derive from the overall
objective. :

2. Strive to frame your specific objectives on the broader, more conceptual side, reflecting the
“why” behind the task or activity.

. i jecti ith a hypothesis, create a brief, general state-
lowing each specific objective with ahyp s, ; era
cae cee that i pie the tasks/activities required to achieve that specific objective.

‘ si a ce lated” statement regarding preliminary/prior find-
f following that with a “how formul t t ‘ 1

4. eer paenibes t indicating why/how you are taking this particular approach. Often, this

reflec: yan prior experience or success with a given methodological or technical strategy.

sie jects, by nature, create hybrid Proposals, and many combina-
Hybrid orig eee au specific objectives are Possible, depending upon the nature
tions of ae as a and Education functions may, but do not typically test hypotheses,
of the ee . Ex als may, or may not, have a central hypothesis, Integrated Proposals would
Thus, hybri be of hypothesis-containing Tesearch specific objectives and at least one need-
generally have a a education specific objective. For an integrated Proposal with three specific
driven sarc lective “weight” of the specific objectives should also reflect the budget re-
objectives: no more than 2/3 of the budget can be allocated to one function. Thus, with two
quirement t ss ted specific objectives and one extension-oriented Specific objective, the extension
ree be significant enough to require 1/3 of the total budget,

projec

—

|
|
L
L
L
L
L
a
Q

--- PAGE 13 ---
“Payoff” Paragraph

TIP: The purpose of this last paragraph is to inform re-
viewers what they can expect for a return if they vote to
tecommend funding of your application. It is particularly
important in terms of recruiting advocacy among the non-
assigned reviewers — the majority — who, will likely be
seeing your application for the first time when it comes up

for discussion at the review panel meeting.

Innovation. Not all scientifically meritorious research is innovative; however, “Novelty, innova-
tion, uniqueness, and originality” is one of the criteria under Scientific Merit. Reviewers typi-
cally appreciate a statement that tells why or how the work is innovative, because innovation is a
highly subjective review criterion, and can be tricky for reviewers to assess. Thus, if it is appro-
priate to do so, it is helpful to your reviewer, and therefore beneficial for you, to offer why you
think that the project is innovative. We suggest that the fourth paragraph begins with a statement
about why the proposed research is innovative, if you can make a credible case for it. Usually, it
is the approach that you are taking that distinguishes the work as innovative, but it might also in-
volve a new conceptualization of the problem, or the use of theory from another discipline.

The goal here is to feature a sharp contrast between what is conventionally done, or how some-
thing is traditionally conceptualized, and how this application is proposing to do something
meaningfully different. For example, “The proposed research is innovative because while con-
ventional approaches involve X, we propose to use Y.”

Special Note:

Many AFRI application instructions, including those for AFRI Foundational, and Sustainable
Agricultural Systems (SAS) explicitly instruct applicants: “Any novel ideas or contributions that
the proposed project offers should also be discussed in this section,” referring to Rationale and
Significance. Read your instructions carefully, and if directed, be prepared to eventually place
your innovation statement in Rationale and Significance as opposed to here, leading paragraph 4
of the Overview.

Now, in the template, write a bullet on how this project is innovative.

Expected Outcomes. These are the expected products of the research. In other words, these rep-
resent the “payoff” that reviewers can expect to realize if they vote to recommend funding of
your application. We want you to include them here, together, rather than individually under the
related specific objectives because reviewers can more easily see that, collectively, the outcomes
allow you to attain your overall objective for the proposal. There should be at least one important
expected outcome for each of your specific objectives, and clear linkage of each outcome back to
the specific objective that produced it.

Now, write bullets that itemize the outcomes that are expected from your specific objec-
A
tives/aims.

62

--- PAGE 14 ---
Impact. These ;

what you will en be difficult to write because they must succinctly summarize
clude your Overview sub. eran In your Rationale and Significance section. You should con-
Pected results will have ae by writing a generality about the positive impact that your ex-
want reviewers to le ‘ fi © purpose in doing So is twofold. First, and most importantly, you
ject. Second, this | ae iienaeiche di subsection with a positive overall impression of your pro-
cation. 3 ast sentence should provide a seamless segue into the next section of the appli-

Write these sentences at a general level (this is the one place in the application where you need to
write generally, rather than specifically). After you have written this statement, ask, “Does what I
have written generally convey what the impact of the expected outcomes will be with respect to
US. agriculture?” The impact that you expect should include full or, at least partial, solution of
the agriculturally important problem that you delineated in the first paragraph. Additionally,
make sure that your impact statement is congruent with the program priority description in the
RFA to which you are responding. In this sense, the agency is telling you what its interests and
priorities are. Your impact statement should speak to these interests. You will eventually use the

significance portion of the Rationale and Significance section to substantiate the generalization
that you write here.

Now, in the template, write the bullet that summarizes how your results will advance the field.

After completing your bulleted outline, print it and consider carefully how all of the elements re-
late to each other. Remember that we called attention earlier to how important the gap/lack is in
setting up the flow of logic downstream from it. As is shown in the figure on the next page, when
you write the gap/lack it automatically sets up the downstream linear progression of logic, be-
cause there must be a critical/urgent need to fill the gap or address the lack. That, in turn, sets up
the overall objective which must be to fill the gap or remedy the lack. When you write the over-
all objective, you set up the central hypothesis, because that is what must be objectively tested in
order to attain the overall objective. When you write your central hypothesis, its parts set up the
specific objectives. The specific objectives, in turn, have expected outcomes. Those, in turn,
must collectively result in attainment of the overall objective, thereby meeting the need by filling
the gap/remedying the lack. As mentioned earlier, if you are proposing a project that lacks a cen-
tral hypothesis, the only difference in the figure, above, would be that “CENTRAL HYPOTHE-
SIS” would be deleted. Otherwise, the progression of logic would be the same.

: d perfect your bullets, making sure that the:
fh time as you need to refine an b ma? ha 9 are 28
Spend us ae they can be. The better that these work in creating the all-important linear pro-
wel of logic, the easier it will be to write the Overview subsection, which is the subject of
ess.

the next Chapter.

--- PAGE 15 ---
CHAPTER 7

WRITING THE OVERVIEW SUBSECTION

In the previous chapter, we introduced you to the purpose of each of the components of the Over-
view subsection of the Introduction and showed you how to create a bulleted outline using them.
In this chapter, we will guide you through the process of expanding your bullets, which is the ini-
tial step in formulating the first draft of this subsection.

Each of the components that constitute the Introduction’s Overview subsection has to be linked
logically to what comes before it and to what comes after it. If, for any reason, a reviewer has to
stop and think about how one element relates to another, you have lost their concentration and
made it unnecessarily difficult to grasp what you are trying to convey. Most writers of grant ap-
plications fail to develop such linkage and cohesion when they write this part of their application.
They tend to write as they think: randomly, without a linear progression of logic that will make
the subsection easy to read. Transforming the bulleted outline into prose will help you present a
clear progression of logic for your reviewer.

Another mistake that most proposal writers make is to include too much technical detail. To
avoid this trap, think of this opening subsection as an executive summary of the application, ie.,
one that is meant to project mainly the conceptual and most exciting aspects of your application.
It is meant to set the scene for the rest of the application and to convert the reviewer from some-
one who has to read the proposal to someone who wants to do so. Save the details for later when
the reviewer is ready to receive them. Only key citations from the literature are needed at this
stage. (Additional supporting citations will be provided later, of course, for your assigned re-
viewers.)

In terms of writing the Overview subsection, and indeed the entire Project Narrative, we recom-
mend that nothing be left to reviewer interpretation. If you require them to interpret what you
have written, they may not make the desired interpretation or — worse — they may make the
wrong interpretation. To avoid this problem, we recommend that you help reviewers make the
connections that you want them to make. The approach we have developed allows you to tell re-
viewers exactly why information has been included without running the risk of being seen as pe-
dantic or condescending while doing so. The approach entails labeling of the components that
make up the subsection in such a way that there can be no question as to why you have included
the information. Labeling of key sentences also helps to lead reviewers through what you have
written. A well-written proposal leads reviewers without them knowing that they are being led.
The approach makes comprehension effortless, because nO work is needed to appreciate why ma-
terial has been included. As you expand your bullets we will recommend where and how to use

such labels.

65
